\section{Motivation}

Civil aviation has primarily been focused on efficiently moving goods
and people via the airspace to their destination. The application of
sound engineering practices and conservative operating procedures has
made flying the safest form of transport. The desire not to compromise
such a safe system has made it difficult to introduce unmanned and
autonomous vehicles into the airspace. The rules for operating
aircraft in the US national airspace are typically relaxed when needed
to support natural disaster relief such as wildfire fighting and
hurricane relief. The NASA Aeronautics' Airspace Operations and Safety
Program (AOSP) System Wide Safety (SWS) project has been investigating
how unmanned and manned aircraft may safely operate in shared
airspace, using wildfire fighting and hurricane relief as use cases.

Traditionally, civil aviation has employed simple communication
patterns between air and ground and among aircraft. The typical
airborne communication is very simple in that aircraft broadcast their
position information via automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast
(ADSB). Air-ground communication is basically radio communication from
pilots to air traffic controllers.  The use cases under consideration
demand more sophisticated coordination sometimes between airborne and
ground based elements in order to accomplish shared mission goals such
as to extinguish fire. Yet the operating environment will not admit
the use of reliable high-bandwidth internet connections that enable
reliable transfers of large data. At best we can assume an ad-hoc
wireless mesh network facilitating communication between aircraft as
well as between aircraft and ground crews. We cannot assume a reliable
communication medium. Ground crews on different sides of a ridge line
will almost certainly loose direct communication with each other and
if the ridge line is high enough the ground crew may lose
communication with low flying aircraft on the other side. Ad-hoc
networks may allow messages to be routed around such barriers, but at
some cost of additional communications.
